# Introduction

Welcome to the Year of Scala Project. This project is designed to support a Years worth of content for coding with a focus on Scala, Scala.JS, and Scala Native. It is structured around 24 modules, with two modules a month, or two week sprints for each module. The initial content is heavily influenced by LLM generation, but over time this project will be adapted to be unique, customized, and rewarding. The project is designed to cover about a year's worth of content, but can be progressed through at any pace. Furthermore, the structure of the project is designed to be composable of its individual units, so pick and choose what interests you or looks challenging.
# Concepts

## What is Scala and why use it?

> Scala is a multi-paradigm programming language, offering succinct and concise syntax, elegance, and type safety. It focuses on two main programming paradigms, functional and object-oriented, and fuses them in a way that is seemingly integrated. There are many reasons to use Scala, but a few focal points are it's sophisticated type system, it's elegant syntax, its interoperability with the Java ecosystem, and its emphasis on functional programming with a robust object model to back it up.

## Scala vs Java

> Scala and Java have both a fair number of similarities and differences.
#### Similarities
* Scala runs on the JVM also, with code being compiled down to .class files.
* Both are object-oriented languages.
* Support for functional programming techniques (higher-order functions, lambdas)
* Utilize same set of build tools
* Seamless integration between both ecosystems.

#### Differences
* Scala is more concise and readable.
* Scala is a pure OOP and pure FP language, encouraging a fusion of the two.
* Scala has a full set of immutable collections.
* Everything in Scala is an expression

### Scala Type System

> One of the most unique and interesting aspects of Scala is the Scala type system. It is important to keep in mind that Scala is a statically typed language, but through the use of features such as type inference, it often feels like a dynamically typed language.

There are many benefits to using a statically typed language, and Scala's type system embodies these principles. 

1) Eliminates a large class of potential errors at compile time, instead of waiting till it crashes at run-time.
2) Provides strong IDE support and integration
3) Aids in refactoring large code-bases and maintaining existing code-bases.
4) Provides 'Code-As-Documentation'


# Lesson


# Assessments
## Resources

[Scala Homepage](https://www.scala-lang.org/)
## Review Questions

1. Scala is often described as "Scala is scalable". In your own words, what does Scala offer to support this claim?
2. Describe why Scala is able to interact so well with Java and why most Java libraries can be used within Scala as-is?
3. Is Scala a dynamically or statically typed language? In what ways does it feel like one over the other?
## Journal Prompt

1. Reflect on Scala's high-level features. What appeals to you about them, where do you think Scala is its strongest, and where do you think it is its weakest?
## Mini-Coding Exercises

1. **Hello Scala!** - Create a Scala program with a `main` method that prints a greeting and a fun fact about yourself.
2. **Classes vs Objects** - Implement a `Bill` class with a mutable `total` field and methods to add a item to the bill or remove item from
3. **Traits** - Define an `Engine` trait with an abstract `throttle(speed: Int)` method. Implement classes `CarEngine` and `PlaneEngine` that extend the trait with different messages.
4. **Immutable vs Mutable Collections** - Create a program that creates an immutable `List` of animals in a zoo, and a mutable `ArrayBuffer` that contains an array of animal weights.
5. **Pattern Matching Basics** - Simulate a simple traffic light and use Pattern Matching to determine a message to print out depending on the color of the traffic light.
## Mini-Projects

1. **Album Organizer** - Create an organizer for your music albums which prompts for an albums title, artist, and genre. Keep this data in memory and use classes and case classes to model Albums.
2. **Hangman** - Create a simple game of hangman that allows a user X number of guesses to guess a word randomly chosen.
3. **Book Manager** - Create a simple book manager to for keeping track of books read, synopsis, publish date, author, etc...
4. **Library Explorer** - Pick any number of libraries and write at least two small examples demonstrating various functions in each library.

## Libraries

* [Scala Standard Library](https://www.scala-lang.org/api/3.3.3/)
* [scalatest](https://www.scalatest.org/)
* [cats](https://typelevel.org/cats/)
* [circe](https://circe.github.io/circe/)
* [scala-parser-combinators](https://github.com/scala/scala-parser-combinators)

